# Analyzing Wildfire Dynamics: an Agent-Based Model of the 2025 Wolf Wildfire

The 2025 Wolf Wildfire near Denare Beach, Saskatchewan was one of the most severe wildfires in Western Canada, contributing to one of the worst fire seasons in Canadian history. This project utilizes Agent-Based Modelling to simulate wildfire spread dynamics using historical environmental data and geographical information as inputs, with the goal of reproducing the behaviour of the Wolf Wildfire, and analyzing how varying conditions and interventions influence the spread of the fire. In particular, the model employs rasterized geospatial data in three layers, woodland, water, and saturated soil, in addition to hourly climate observations such as temperature, wind speed, wind direction, relative humidity percent, and precipitation. Agents in the model are cells, representing areas of land, and are organized in discrete space. Each cell incorporates various exogenous factors, such as moisture, and endogenous factors, such as fuel levels. Overall, the model utilizes 22,500 agents in a 150 by 150 grid, allowing cells to ignite neighbours based on directionality and moisture, and fire spreads at a rate given by employing equations from the McArthur's fire danger meters for forests. Calibration and sensitivity analysis were conducted to evaluate model behaviour and assess the influence of various parameters, particularly moisture and fuel consumption rate, on fire spread dynamics. These revealed how  the model reflects unrealistic effects based on moisture variations. Furthermore, various scenarios fortified the current understanding of forest fires relating to seasonal climates. Overall, the model establishes a foundation for understanding wildfire spread dynamics and provides a framework for future development in order to support retrospective wildfire analysis and inform fire management strategies.
